## CWS-GBMP\_SaskGrasslands



Creators: Erica Alex, Janine McManus, Barry Robinson (barry.robinson@ec.gc.ca)

Affiliations: Terrestrial Unit, Prairie Region, Canadian Wildlife Service, Environment and Climate Change Canada

Version number \[v1]

DOI:



## General characteristics

number of localization arrays: 2

array geometry: 7x7 offset grid with 40m spacing

number of audio files: 4766

audio format: short (10 second clips centered on 3s localized events)

dimensions localized: 2

sounds localized: Grasshopper Sparrow (song), Chestnut-collared Longspur (song), playback species-mix

size: 1.45GB



## Study description

Study purpose: These data were collected as part of a pilot study using acoustic localization to estimate the density of grassland songbirds. The arrays were deployed in South-West Saskatchewan in May and June 2025. The locations were selected based on species distribution models generated by Environment and Climate Change Canada, and were targeted in areas with high predicted densities for species of interest (grassland specialists, species at risk, etc.). The first array, located near Nashlyn, SK was deployed where models predicted high densities of Chestnut-collared Longspur *(Calcarius ornatus*)*,* Horned Lark *(Eremophilia alpestris*)*,* Baird's Sparrow *(Cenntronyx bairdii*)*,* and Grasshopper Sparrow *(Ammodramus savannarum*)*.* The second array, located near Sceptre, SK was deployed where models predicted high densities of Sprague's Pipit *(Anthus spragueii*)*,* Baird's Sparrow *(Cenntronyx bairdii*) and Grasshopper Sparrow *(Ammodramus savannarum*).



Personnel: Erica Alex, Janine McManus, Amy Sutley and Barry Robinson participated in data collection. EA conducted analyses and compiled the dataset with support from BR.



Data types collected: audio recordings, focal follows, playback (Note: stereo recordings at centroid, point count surveys, and spotmap surveys available but not included here)



## Files



\#localized\_events.csv: table with a row describing each acoustically localized sound

Columns:

event\_id: unique within the dataset

label: species or other sound type name (e.g. “playback”) of the localized event

start\_timestamp: onset time of the event in ISO format 2025-05-20T10:00:00.000-05:00

duration: event length in seconds

position: localized position coordinate in meters: (utm x, utm y)

reciever\_files: list of file ids for audio clips that participated in the localization (matches file\_id column of audio\_file\_table.csv)

receiver\_start\_time\_offsets: time in seconds from start of each audio file to the start of the label

cc\_maxs: list of cross-correlation values for each reciever in reciever\_files

tdoas: list of time-delay of arrival values for each reciever in reciever\_files

residual\_rms: residual root mean square of the localized position (meters)

hawkears\_score: HawkEars score for minimum spectrogram of localized event



\#/scripts

/scripts/frontierlabsutils.py: python script with functions for post-processing Frontier Labs recordings

/scripts/sync\_recordings.py: python script using frontierlabsutils lib to synchronize recordings based on loclog.txt files

/scripts/trim\_recordings.py: python script using frontierlabsutils lib to trim recordings to the same start and end time

/scripts/HawkEars.txt: command line script with parameters for running HawkEars on trimmed audio

/scripts/validationapp.R: R script for validating a subset of HawkEars detections, stratified by score

/scripts/hawkears\_validation\_EGA: R script for selecting species-specific score threshold for HawkEars detections based on true positive rate

/scripts/csv\_wrangle.R: R script for preparing aru\_coords and detections csv for localization

/scripts/localization.py: python script using OpenSoundscape to perform acoustic localization of HawkEars detections, prepare data files, and visualize results

/scripts/localization\_env.yml: conda environment file to recreate the python environment used in analyses



\#/localization\_metadata

/localization\_metadata/audio\_file\_table.csv: lists all audio files by file\_id, relative\_path (from the top-level directory of this dataset to the audio clip), and the recorder\_id (index to point\_table for location of microphone)

/localization\_metadata/localization\_metadata/point\_table.csv: lists the positions of each microphone



\#/audio

/audio/subfolder: one for each receiver that participated in localization (recorder\_id in points\_table). Contains 10s audio clips (.flac) for each localized event, centered on the 3s window where the event occurred.



## Sites

\[SNAS] Prairie Pastures Conservation Area, Nashlyn, Saskatchewan, Canada.

Mixed grass ecozone. Primarily dominated by native grasses (*Stipa* sp., *Wheatgrass* sp., *Bouteloua gracilis*) and shrubs (*Artemisia cana, Rosa arkansana, Symphoricarpos occidentalis*) with some invasion by non-native species (*Agropyron cristatum, Taraxacum* sp.). The bird community is dominated by native grassland specialists such as the Chestnut-collared Longspur, and generalists such as Vesper Sparrow (*Pooecetes gramineus*), Western Meadowlark (*Sturnella neglecta*), and Horned Lark. Grazed by cattle intermittently through the spring and summer.



\[GSA] Great Sandhills National Wildlife Area, Sceptre, Saskatchewan, Canada

Moist Mixed grass ecozone. Sandy soils, primarily dominated by native grasses and shrubs (*Elaeagnus commutate, Rosa arkansana, Juniperus horizontalis*). The bird community is dominated by native grassland specialists such as the Sprague's Pipit and Grasshopper Sparrow, and generalists such as the Savannah Sparrow (*Passerculus sandwichensis*), Clay-colored Sparrow (*Spizella pallida*), Western Meadowlark, and Eastern Kingbird (*Tyrannus tyrannus*). Grazed by cattle intermittently throughout the spring and summer.



## Hardware

Recorder source: Frontier Labs (Brisbane, AUS)

Recorder model: BAR-LT

Firmware version: FL BAR-LT Localization Firmware 3.32-L



## Recording properties

Date range of data: SNAS \[2025-05-30 to 2025-05-31], GSA \[2025-06-18 to 2025-06-20]

Times of recording: 06:30 to 08:30 local time

Sleep-wake schedule: records for 30min every 35min from 1hr before sunrise to 4.5hr after sunrise

Sample rate: 44.1 kHz

Other relevant settings: 40dB gain

Data aggregation notes: Receivers GSA-B1 and SNAS-C5 malfunctioned and did not record data.



## Recorder positioning



\#Placement

Spatial pattern or geometry: 7x7 grid of hexagons (every other row offset by 20m)

Range of spacing between adjacent mics: 40m between mics in the grid, \~45m between hexagon centroid and corners

Dimensions of array: 240m x 240m



\#Deployment: We used zip ties to affix the units to rebar which was driven into the ground. The units were approximately 30cm from the ground, and were all positioned with the microphone pointing North.



\#Position measurement

Method of measurement: SparkFun RTK Facet on a surveying pole, measured at each receiver

Measurement post-processing: None

General accuracy (lat/long): \[GSA] 0.14m - 0.21m (mean 0.15 +/- 0.014)

General accuracy (elevation): \[GSA] 0.24m - 0.36m (mean 0.27 +/- 0.024)



## Synchronization



Synchronization type: GPS

Synchronization frequency: GPS timestamp at the start and end of 30min recording

Synchronization method: loglog.txt files used to identify buffer overflows and insert blank spaces

Recording start/end time trimming: Synchronized recordings taken simultaneously were trimmed to the same start time and end time

Scripts used: frontierlabsutils.py, sync\_recording.py, trim\_recordings.py
Resources: frontierlabutils (Rhinehart 2024; https://github.com/rhine3/frontierlabsutils)



## Sound detection

Audio preprocessing: NA

Are recordings in the dataset denoised? No

Scripts: NA



Classes: IBP alpha codes v 2025

\[GSA] GRSP (Grasshopper Sparrow; Ammodramus savannarum); songs only


\[SNAS] CCLO (Chestnut-collared Longspur; Calcarius ornatus); songs only



Playback species mix (songs only):

NSWO (Northern Saw-whet Owl, *Aegolius acadicus*), DEJU (Dark-eyed Junco, *Junco hyemalis*), AMRO (American Robin, *Turdus migratorius*), WEME (Western Meadowlark), MOWA (Mourning Warbler, *Geothlypis philadelphia*), AMCR (American Crow, *Corvus brachyrhynchos*), LCSP (LeConte's Sparrow, *Ammospiza leconteii*), YEWA (Yellow Warbler, *Setophaga petechia*), BADO (Barred Owl, *Strix varia*), ALFL (Alder Flycatcher, *Empidonax alnorum*), VESP (Vesper Sparrow), CCSP (Clay-colored Sparrow), BOCH (Boreal Chickadee, *Poecile hudsonicus*), BRBL (Brewer's Blackbird, *Euphagus cyanocephalus*), MAWR (Marsh Wren, *Cistothorus palustris*)



Detection strategy: Convolutional neural network

Detector name and version: HawkEars v.1.0.9 (Huus et al 2025)

Link to detector information: https://github.com/jhuus/HawkEars
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoinf.2025.103122



Post-processing detector outputs:

We conducted species-specific thresholding of classifier scores based on the methods of Tseng et al 2025. We first ran HawkEars at the lowest threshold possible (0.1). We then binned the scores in 0.05 score increments (18 bins, 0.1 to 1.0) and selected a random sample of 10 detections per bin to validate for species presence by audio and visual inspection of the spectrograms. We then used logistic regression of classifier score and TP/FP classifications to generate calibration curves and select confidence thresholds that achieved a target precision of 0.90. We then ran HawkEars a second time at the selected threshold and used these detections for localization.



GRSP specific threshold: 0.15 \[Note: threshold of 0.75 used for focal follow on 0618 due to insect noise]

CCLO threshold: 0.25



scripts: hawkears.txt, validationapp.R; hawkears\_validation\_EGA.R; csv\_wrangle.R



## Localization:



Tools/packages used for localization: OpenSoundscape Library (Lapp et al 2023)

Localization algorithm: GCC-PHAT (OpenSoundscape v0.11.0 default)

Time delay calculation algorithm: "soundfinder" (OpenSoundscape v0.11.0 default)

References: https://opensoundscape.org/en/latest/tutorials/acoustic\_localization.html



Error rejection parameters:
min\_recievers = 4 (minimum number of receivers used to localize song)
max\_distance = 80 (maximum distance is meters from reference microphone to microphone used in localization)
residual rms < 20m \[Note: No rms filter used for follow or playback in order to properly assess precision and accuracy of results]
distance outside convex hull < 20m



individual aggregation = 10m (localized positions less than 10m apart with the same label and start\_timestamp are assumed to be the same individual, reduced to single position estimate with the lowest rms)



minspec threshold = 0.4 (for each localized event, the minimum spectrogram is generated using the lowest value across aligned audio clips for each pixel position. We then analyzed each minspec using HawkEars, and filtered the results at a score of 0.4. This method filters out most errors in species detection and audio cross-correlation)



\[Note: events from focal follows or playback were manually reviewed and the minspec threshold was not applied]



Note: Position estimates for focal follows and playbacks were filtered to only those in which the receiver nearest to the known position participated in the localization, and whose start\_timestamp closely matched that of the known song event. This ensures that the results represent the events of interest, and do not contain extraneous individuals. In some cases, the localization was not successful for a particular song event, thus there is no matching position estimate.



scripts: localization.py



## Observational data



Focal follows/burst sampling: Observers identified singing males of the target species and approached close enough to observe without disturbing them. We used the Counter app (iOS) with two clickers per individual: one for song events and one for positions. Each time the bird sang or moved positions, the appropriate clicker was selected, recording the precise timestamp for each event. Relevant notes, photos, and diagrams were used to memorize the birds positions. After 15min, or when the individual moved and could no longer be confidently distinguished, observations stopped. The location of each unique singing position was then recorded using SW Maps (iOS).



Playbacks: broadcasted recordings from Bose SoundLink speaker at max volume at random locations within the array. Recordings were broadcasted at receiver locations where precise positions were known (RTK). The recordings began with a sequence of pure tones, followed by a mix of 15 species vocalizations selected based on mean peak song frequency, duration, bandwidth, and spectral entropy. The recordings end with a short sequence of pink noise and a sine wave.



## Acknowledgements

List people and roles, eg, a list of field technicians who assisted in deployments

Describe data ownership and any restrictions on the use of the data



## License

CC-BY-SA 4.0 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/



## Work Cited and Links

Huus, Jan; Kelly, Kevin G,; Bayne, Erin M.; Knight, Elly C. HawkEars: A regional, high-performance avian acoustic classifier. (2025). Ecological Informatics (87). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoinf.2025.103122



Lapp, Sam; Rhinehart, Tessa; Freeland-Haynes, Louis; Khilnani, Jatin; Syunkova, Alexandra; Kitzes, Justin. OpenSoundscape: An Open-Source Bioacoustics Analysis Package for Python. (2023) Methods in Ecology and Evolution. https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.14196.



Rhinehart, Tessa. Acoustic synchronization for Frontier Labs recorders (2024). https://github.com/rhine3/frontierlabsutils



Tseng, S., Hodder, D.P. \& Otter, K.A. Setting BirdNET confidence thresholds: species-specific vs. universal approaches.(2025). J Ornithol 166, 1123–1135. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10336-025-02260-w

